README.md, before:

# DeepPlate - Smart ML Rego Detection

![CodeQL](https://github.com/Tristan296/DeepPlate/actions/workflows/codeql.yml/badge.svg)
[![Quality Gate Status](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=Tristan296_DeepPlate&metric=alert_status)](https://sonarcloud.io/summary/overall?id=Tristan296_DeepPlate&branch=main)


## Table of Contents

* [General Info](#general-information)
* [Technologies Used](#technologies-used)
* [Features](#features)
* [Screenshots](#screenshots)
* [Setup](#setup)
* [Usage](#usage)
* [Project Status](#project-status)
* [Model Training Summary](#model-training-summary)
* [Room for Improvement](#room-for-improvement)
* [Contributing](CONTRIBUTIONS.md)
* [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)
* [Contact](#contact)

## General Information

- This project aims to simplify the process of detecting and classifying text in vehicle regos using advanced machine learning techniques.

## Technologies Used

- Python - version 3.9
- TensorFlow - version 2.10
- OpenCV - version 4.5

## Features

### License Plate Detection & OCR
- Detects license plates using YOLO object detection.
- Extracts text from plates using PaddleOCR.

### State & License Plate Validation
- Validates license plate text against regex patterns for Australian states and territories.
- Supports standard, premium, historic, and special-purpose license plate formats.

### Database Integration
- Stores detected license plates and their associated states in a SQLite database (`regos.db`).
- Prevents duplicate license plates from being inserted.

### Real-Time Video Processing
- Captures and processes video frames in real-time using OpenCV.
- Annotates frames with bounding boxes and recognized text.

### Multiprocessing
- Utilizes Python’s `multiprocessing` module for parallel video capture and frame processing.
- Uses a Queue for inter-process communication.

### Image Preprocessing for OCR
- Improves OCR accuracy through resizing, grayscale conversion, histogram equalization, Gaussian blur, and binarization.
- Corrects rotated license plates using deskewing techniques.

### Frame Annotation
- Draws bounding boxes and overlays recognized license plate text on video frames.

  
## Screenshots

<img width="598" alt="Screenshot 2025-04-05 at 6 30 53 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/06c183b3-6ee8-4a6c-bb18-0b5a18a36620" />


## Setup

- Install the required dependencies listed in `requirements.txt`.
- Clone the repository and navigate to the project directory.
- Run the following command to install dependencies:
  ```
  pip install -r requirements.txt
  ```

## Usage

- To detect objects using webcam, run the following command:
  ```
  python main.py
  ```

## Project Status

Project is: _in progress_. Further improvements and optimizations are being worked on.

## Room for Improvement

Room for improvement:

- Enhance the accuracy of object detection.
- Add support for additional machine learning models.

To do:

- Implement a user-friendly GUI.
- Add functionality for batch image processing.

# Model Training Summary

## General Information
The model was trained using the YOLO framework with the following configuration:
- **Task**: Object Detection
- **Model**: YOLO (yolo11n.pt)
- **Dataset**: COCO8
- **Epochs**: 100
- **Batch Size**: 16
- **Image Size**: 640x640
- **Device**: MPS (Metal Performance Shaders)

## Training Results
The training process generated the following key results:
- **Final Model**: Saved as `last.pt` in the `weights/` directory.
- **Metrics**:
    - **Precision**: Improved steadily, reaching a maximum of ~0.00367.
    - **Recall**: Peaked at 0.66667 during early epochs.
    - **mAP@50**: Reached a maximum of 0.28376.
    - **mAP@50-95**: Reached a maximum of 0.13616.

## Loss Trends
- **Box Loss**: Decreased significantly over epochs, indicating better localization.
- **Classification Loss**: Reduced steadily, showing improved classification accuracy.
- **DFL Loss**: Gradually decreased, reflecting better distribution-focused learning.

## Visualizations
- **Confusion Matrices**: `confusion_matrix.png` and `confusion_matrix_normalized.png` provide insights into class-wise performance.
- **Curves**:
    - `F1_curve.png`: Shows the F1-score progression.
    - `P_curve.png`: Precision curve.
    - `R_curve.png`: Recall curve.
    - `PR_curve.png`: Precision-Recall curve.

## Training Batches
- Sample training images are available (`train_batch0.jpg`, `train_batch1.jpg`, etc.), showing the model's predictions during training.

## Validation Results
- Validation images (`val_batch0_labels.jpg`, `val_batch0_pred.jpg`) demonstrate the model's performance on unseen data.

## Observations
- The model shows steady improvement in metrics over epochs.
- The mAP values suggest room for improvement in detection accuracy.
- The training process was well-documented with visualizations and logs.

## Next Steps
- Fine-tune the model to improve mAP and precision.
- Experiment with different hyperparameters or augmentations.
- Test the model on real-world data to evaluate its generalization.


## Acknowledgements

### YOLO by Ultralytics

```bibtex
@misc{yolo2023,
  author       = {Jocher, Glenn and Chaurasia, Ayush and Qiu, Jing},
  title        = {YOLO by Ultralytics},
  year         = {2023},
  publisher    = {GitHub},
  journal      = {GitHub repository},
  howpublished = {\url{https://github.com/ultralytics/yolov5}}
}
```

### PaddleOCR

```bibtex
@article{paddleocr2021,
  author       = {PaddleOCR Contributors},
  title        = {PaddleOCR: An Open-Source Optical Character Recognition Tool Based on PaddlePaddle},
  year         = {2021},
  journal      = {GitHub repository},
  howpublished = {\url{https://github.com/PaddlePaddle/PaddleOCR}}
}
```

## Contact

Created by [@tristan](https://github.com/tristan296) - feel free to contact me!

Commit message:

Update README.md to include new features: video file processing, GPU acceleration, enhanced model training, and validation/testing details.

README.md, after:

# DeepPlate - Smart ML Rego Detection

![CodeQL](https://github.com/Tristan296/DeepPlate/actions/workflows/codeql.yml/badge.svg)
[![Quality Gate Status](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=Tristan296_DeepPlate&metric=alert_status)](https://sonarcloud.io/summary/overall?id=Tristan296_DeepPlate&branch=main)


## Table of Contents

* [General Info](#general-information)
* [Technologies Used](#technologies-used)
* [Features](#features)
* [Screenshots](#screenshots)
* [Setup](#setup)
* [Usage](#usage)
* [Project Status](#project-status)
* [Model Training Summary](#model-training-summary)
* [Room for Improvement](#room-for-improvement)
* [Contributing](CONTRIBUTIONS.md)
* [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)
* [Contact](#contact)

## General Information

- This project aims to simplify the process of detecting and classifying text in vehicle regos using advanced machine learning techniques.

## Technologies Used

- Python - version 3.9
- TensorFlow - version 2.10
- OpenCV - version 4.5

## Features
### License Plate Detection & OCR
- Detects license plates using YOLO object detection.
- Extracts text from plates using PaddleOCR.

### State & License Plate Validation
- Validates license plate text against regex patterns for Australian states and territories.
- Supports standard, premium, historic, and special-purpose license plate formats.

### Database Integration
- Stores detected license plates and their associated states in a SQLite database (`regos.db`).
- Prevents duplicate license plates from being inserted.

### Real-Time Video Processing
- Captures and processes video frames in real-time using OpenCV.
- Annotates frames with bounding boxes and recognized text.

### Multiprocessing
- Utilizes Python’s `multiprocessing` module for parallel video capture and frame processing.
- Uses a Queue for inter-process communication.

### Image Preprocessing for OCR
- Improves OCR accuracy through resizing, grayscale conversion, histogram equalization, Gaussian blur, and binarization.
- Corrects rotated license plates using deskewing techniques.

### Frame Annotation
- Draws bounding boxes and overlays recognized license plate text on video frames.

### Video File Processing
- Processes video files for license plate detection and recognition.
- Annotates detected plates in video frames and saves the results to a new video file.

### GPU Acceleration
- Leverages GPU capabilities (CUDA, MPS, or ROCm) for faster inference and processing.

### Enhanced Model Training
- Includes training configurations and results for YOLO-based object detection models.
- Provides visualizations such as confusion matrices, precision-recall curves, and training batch predictions.

### Validation and Testing
- Validates model performance on unseen data with detailed metrics and visual results.
- Tests the model on real-world video streams and images for generalization.

<img width="598" alt="Screenshot 2025-04-05 at 6 30 53 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/06c183b3-6ee8-4a6c-bb18-0b5a18a36620" />


## Setup

- Install the required dependencies listed in `requirements.txt`.
- Clone the repository and navigate to the project directory.
- Run the following command to install dependencies:
  ```
  pip install -r requirements.txt
  ```

## Usage

- To detect objects using webcam, run the following command:
  ```
  python main.py
  ```

## Project Status

Project is: _in progress_. Further improvements and optimizations are being worked on.

## Room for Improvement

Room for improvement:

- Enhance the accuracy of object detection.
- Add support for additional machine learning models.

To do:

- Implement a user-friendly GUI.
- Add functionality for batch image processing.

# Model Training Summary

## General Information
The model was trained using the YOLO framework with the following configuration:
- **Task**: Object Detection
- **Model**: YOLO (yolo11n.pt)
- **Dataset**: COCO8
- **Epochs**: 100
- **Batch Size**: 16
- **Image Size**: 640x640
- **Device**: MPS (Metal Performance Shaders)

## Training Results
The training process generated the following key results:
- **Final Model**: Saved as `last.pt` in the `weights/` directory.
- **Metrics**:
    - **Precision**: Improved steadily, reaching a maximum of ~0.00367.
    - **Recall**: Peaked at 0.66667 during early epochs.
    - **mAP@50**: Reached a maximum of 0.28376.
    - **mAP@50-95**: Reached a maximum of 0.13616.

## Loss Trends
- **Box Loss**: Decreased significantly over epochs, indicating better localization.
- **Classification Loss**: Reduced steadily, showing improved classification accuracy.
- **DFL Loss**: Gradually decreased, reflecting better distribution-focused learning.

## Visualizations
- **Confusion Matrices**: `confusion_matrix.png` and `confusion_matrix_normalized.png` provide insights into class-wise performance.
- **Curves**:
    - `F1_curve.png`: Shows the F1-score progression.
    - `P_curve.png`: Precision curve.
    - `R_curve.png`: Recall curve.
    - `PR_curve.png`: Precision-Recall curve.

## Training Batches
- Sample training images are available (`train_batch0.jpg`, `train_batch1.jpg`, etc.), showing the model's predictions during training.

## Validation Results
- Validation images (`val_batch0_labels.jpg`, `val_batch0_pred.jpg`) demonstrate the model's performance on unseen data.

## Observations
- The model shows steady improvement in metrics over epochs.
- The mAP values suggest room for improvement in detection accuracy.
- The training process was well-documented with visualizations and logs.

## Next Steps
- Fine-tune the model to improve mAP and precision.
- Experiment with different hyperparameters or augmentations.
- Test the model on real-world data to evaluate its generalization.


## Acknowledgements

### YOLO by Ultralytics

```bibtex
@misc{yolo2023,
  author       = {Jocher, Glenn and Chaurasia, Ayush and Qiu, Jing},
  title        = {YOLO by Ultralytics},
  year         = {2023},
  publisher    = {GitHub},
  journal      = {GitHub repository},
  howpublished = {\url{https://github.com/ultralytics/yolov5}}
}
```

### PaddleOCR

```bibtex
@article{paddleocr2021,
  author       = {PaddleOCR Contributors},
  title        = {PaddleOCR: An Open-Source Optical Character Recognition Tool Based on PaddlePaddle},
  year         = {2021},
  journal      = {GitHub repository},
  howpublished = {\url{https://github.com/PaddlePaddle/PaddleOCR}}
}
```

## Contact

Created by [@tristan](https://github.com/tristan296) - feel free to contact me!
